Illusions of Sovereignty and Choice
Consumer society, consumer culture, consumerism, consumer politics,
consumer demand, the consumer attitude, and above all ‘the consumer’
are common terms of everyday conversation and media discourse, 
partof attempts to understand the contemporary social predicament of postindustrial 
and late-modern societies and to navigate a course to achieve
the good life. 

Consumption, as a subdiscipline of sociology, has had a
relatively brief but flourishing history. Its substance shifted from being
viewed as the epiphenomenon of economic production and economic
relations to an autonomous arena for individuals to express selfidentity

through fashioning a lifestyle. Yet neither account seemed entirely satisfactory. 
Both, predictably, were restricted and partial, excluding from

consideration some of the factors which give consumption its social and
societal significance.

Without doubt, more commodities suff used the performance of everyday 
life as Western populations entered a phase of unprecedented material abundance. 
This provided an opportunity for some disciplines whose
future lay with keeping the accounts about who purchased what, providing 
advice about how to sell more commodities, exploring how the

intensified commodity culture aff ected the individual and personality,
and determining the effects on social relationships. However, escaping
the idea that consumption is only, or primarily, about the purchase of
commodities in the market was a critical development. Cultural studies
made that clear when it dissected the symbolic signifi cance of the way
in which people displayed material objects and engaged in symbolically
charged activities in public and in private.

From Choice to Practice

1.1 Choice

A considerable proportion of the research which transpired operated
on the basis of an assumption of individual consumer choice. If there
is any overall message arising from the chapters of this book it would

be the value of deconstructing the ramifi cations of the notion of consumer 
choice. I am aware that this betrays a disciplinary stereotype; as the

economist Dusenberry said, ‘Economics is all about how people make
choices, Sociology is all about how they don’t have any choices to make.’
Nevertheless, sociology ought to be wary of accepting both ‘the consumer’

and consumer choice for they are substantively and theoretically misleading 
when seeking a comprehensive understanding of consumption.

I can find no formal definition of consumer choice, but it conjures
up features of a particular form of economic exchange from the point
of view of the recipient of a good or service. It supposes an autonomous

individual, confronting a potential situation of acquisition through purchase, 
who consciously wants a particular item or service, the means to

satisfy which are available and where options exist, making a discrete
and deliberate decision, without prejudice to future decisions, where no
punishment or disadvantage will ensue and personal satisfaction will be
enhanced.